Lab: Create and Manage an S3 Bucket in AWS
Objective
By the end of this lab, you will be able to:
Create and configure an Amazon S3 bucket.
-Upload and manage objects.
-Set bucket permissions and policies.
-Enable versioning and understand its purpose.
-Access your bucket via AWS CLI.

Prerequisites
1. An AWS Account (Free Tier is fine).
2. A configured IAM user with AmazonS3FullAccess permissions.
3. Basic understanding of AWS regions and S3 storage classes.

Lab Sections
Step 1: Log in to the AWS Management Console
1. Go to https://aws.amazon.com/console/.
2. Log in using your IAM user credentials (not the root account).
3. From the Services menu, select S3 under “Storage”.

Step 2: Create a New S3 Bucket (Console)
Click “Create bucket”.
1. Bucket name: Must be globally unique. Example:
 my-first-s3-lab-bucket-damian
2. Region: Choose a region close to you (e.g., us-east-1).
3. Block Public Access settings:
   Leave all boxes checked to block public access (recommended for private buckets).
   For testing a static website, you can uncheck “Block all public access” — but only do this in a non-production environment.
4. Bucket Versioning:
   Enable Versioning to keep multiple versions of objects (optional but recommended for this lab).
5. Encryption:
  Choose Amazon S3-managed keys (SSE-S3).
6. Scroll down and click Create bucket.

✅ Your bucket is now created.

Step 3: Upload Files to the Bucket
1. Click the bucket name to open it.
2. Click Upload → Add files → Choose any local file (e.g., a .txt or .jpg).
3. Click Upload.
Once uploaded, you’ll see your object in the bucket list.

Step 4: Test Object Access and Permissions
1. Click on the uploaded file.
2. Under Object URL, copy the link.
Open the link in a browser — if public access is blocked, you’ll see:
AccessDenied
3. (Optional) To make an object public:
   Select the object → Actions → Make public using ACL.
   Reopen the object URL — you should now see the content.
⚠️ Only make files public when you understand the security implications.

Step 5: Enable Bucket Versioning (if not already enabled)
1. Go to your bucket’s Properties tab.
2. Scroll to Bucket Versioning → click Edit → Enable versioning.
3. Save changes.
Now, if you upload a new file with the same name, the old version remains stored and retrievable.
To view:
   Go to Objects → click Show versions.

Step 6: Create a Folder (Prefix)
In S3, folders are actually key prefixes.
1. In your bucket, click Create folder.
2. Enter name: project-files/
3. Upload files into this folder to see how S3 organizes them using key paths.

Step 7: Apply a Bucket Policy (Optional)
To make the entire bucket publicly readable (⚠️ for demo only):
1. Go to Permissions → Bucket policy.

Paste the following (replace the bucket name):

 {
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Sid": "PublicReadGetObject",
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Principal": "*",
      "Action": "s3:GetObject",
      "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::my-first-s3-lab-bucket-damian/*"
    }
  ]
}

2. Save changes and confirm warning.

Now you can access objects via their URLs.


Key Takeaways
S3 is object storage, not block or file storage.
Buckets are global namespace — bucket names must be unique.
Versioning helps recover from accidental deletions.
Bucket policies and ACLs control access.
AWS CLI is essential for automation and scripting.
