Project 1: Step-by-step guide to creating a website on
Amazon Linux AMI on AWS
Project description: We will deploy a Learning Management System (LMS) in the
AWS cloud platform.
Here is the topology diagram using the Default VPC.

In this project,
These services already exist:
- Region
- Default VPC
- Internet Gateway

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 1

- VPC Subnets

We will create the following components/services:

- An EC2 Instance
- A Load Balancer
- The autoscaler (Autoscaling)
- And Rote53 (optional)
- ACM Certificate to make our website secure (if you done Route53)

Part 1: Creating an EC2 with Amazon Linux AMI
Here are the steps to create an EC2 with Amazon Linux AMI
1. Create a key pair
2. Create an EC2 instance with Amazon Linux AMI
3. Connect to the EC2 instance
4. Install Apache Webserver using Linux commands from the CLI (Command Line
Interface)
5. Test that you can access the website
6. Install git
7. Use git to clone the edukate website from Git Repository &
move edukate to the right location for Apache to access it
8. Access your website from the web browser
9. Create AMI (Amazon Machine Image)
10. Cleanup
Step 1: Create a key pair
Creating keypair is essential for securely accessing your EC2 instances. You need a
keypair to login to an EC2 instance.
The keypair is acting like your password but considered more secure than using
passwords.
Whenever you create a key pair, two keys are created: the public key and the private
key. The private key is automatically downloaded to your laptop. Save this key
securely. You will need it from time to time.
Here's a step-by-step guide on how to create key pairs in AWS:

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 2

1. Log in to the AWS Management Console
- Go to the EC2 AWS Management Console.
https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/
- Log in with your credentials.
2. On the left navigation page:
- Go to Network & Security Section
- Click on Key Pairs
3. Create a New Key Pair
- Click the Create key pair button in orange color.
4. Configure Key Pair Settings

- Name: Use key1 as the name.
Enter a name for your key pair in the Key pair name field. Choose a descriptive name
that helps you remember its purpose. You can use
- key pair type: (don’t change)
- RSA or ED25519. RSA is more widely used, but ED25519 is a newer and more secure

option-
Private key file format ( don't change):

- PEM is for use with OpenSSH or PuTTY.
- PPK if you are using PuTTY on Windows.
Click Create key pair at the bottom of the screen.
5. Download the Key Pair
Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 3

- Your browser will automatically download the private key file (`key1.pem` or `key2.ppk`
depending on your selection). Save this file securely, you will need it to access your
EC2 instances.
- Losing this file means you will not be able to access your EC2 instances associated
with this key pair.
- AWS will not keep a copy of the key( public key)
.
6. Use the Key Pair
- When launching a new EC2 instance, you will be prompted to select an existing key
pair. Choose the key pair you created to access your instance securely.

That’s it! You’ve successfully created a key pair on AWS.
Step 2: Create an EC2 instance with Amazon Linux AMI
Here’s a step-by-step guide to create an EC2 instance with Amazon Linux AMI on AWS:
1. Log in to the AWS Management Console
- Go to the EC2 AWS Management Console.
https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/
- Log in with your credentials.
2. On the left navigation page:
- Go to Instances Section
- Click on instances
3. Launch Instance
- Click on the “Launch Instance” button in orange color.
4. Name and Tags. Give a Name to the instance. For example, VM1
5. Application and OS images (Amazon Machine Image). The default is Amazon Linux.
Don’t change it.
6. Instance Type. The default is t2.micro. Don’t change it.
7. Key pair (login). Select the keypair you created in step 1. The name of the key should
be key1
8. Network settings. Look for Firewall (security groups)
check http to look like below:

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 4

9. Configure Storage. Leave the default. Don't change anything here.
10. Click “Launch Instance”.
11. Wait for the instance to be ready
Congratulations, you have created an EC2 instance.

Step 3: Connect to the EC2 instance from the
Management console
To connect to a Linux EC2 instance from the AWS Management Console, follow these
steps:
1. Log in to the AWS Management Console
- Go to the EC2 AWS Management Console.
https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/
- Log in with your credentials.
2. On the left navigation page:
- Go to Instances Section
- Click on instances
3. Select Your Instance:
- Find and select the instance you want to connect to. You will see the name as VM1.
Select the square button.

5. Connect to the Instance:
- Click on the Connect button at the top of the page.
- A pop-up window will appear with connection options.
Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 5

- click connect at the bottom of the page
- This will open a new browser-based terminal session.
6. The Linux terminal

Congratulations, you have connected to your Linux instance. We are going to type
Linux commands on the black terminal. Don't worry about what the commands mean
at this stage, but shortly, we will be learning Linux.
Note: The reason you create Linux servers is to host an application. Below, we are
going to host a website.

Step 4: Install Apache Webserver using Linux commands
from the CLI (Command Line Interface)

What is Apache server?
Apache is a very popular Linux web server. It helps you to host a website on a server
so that your customers can access the website running on Apache.
Here is the website for Apache:
https://www.apache.org/

Here are step-by-step instructions to install Apache on an Amazon EC2 instance
running Amazon Linux:
The commands you need to type (or copy and paste) are in green color.
1. Perform the following from browser-based terminal session(CLI) in the previous step
(step 3)
Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 6

2. Update Package Repository
- Update the package repository to ensure you have the latest package lists:
sudo yum update -y
3. Install Apache HTTP Server
- Install the Apache HTTP server using the `yum` package manager:
sudo yum install httpd -y
4. Start Apache Service
- Start the Apache service:
sudo systemctl start httpd
5. Enable Apache to Start on Boot
- Configure Apache to start automatically when the instance boots:
sudo systemctl enable httpd

Step 5: Test that you can access the Apache default
website page
1. Obtain the Public IPv4 address of your EC2 instance
- Click here
https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/
- Select your instance.
- Copy the Public IPv4 address at the lower section of the screen

2. Put the public IP address on a web browser, and you will see the default Apache
home page

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 7

3. (Optional) Modify the Apache Default Page
- You can edit the default Apache page by modifying the `/var/www/html/index.html`
file:
- use an editor called nano to open the index.html page
sudo nano /var/www/html/index.html
- Make your changes: put the following in the text editor
I am becoming a cloud guru
- save the file. Press the 2 keys together. This is letter O of the alphabet
ctlr+O
- Exit the editor. Press the 2 keys together. This is letter X of he alphabet
ctlr+X
- Ensure you have exited nano
- refresh your browser with the IP address of your default apache page to see
the updates. You will see

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 8

That’s it! You’ve successfully installed and started Apache on your Amazon EC2
instance.

Step 6: Install git
What is git?
Git is a version control system. It is a very important tool used by almost every
company in the world. Git helps you to maintain di

erent versions of your application.
Git is used with GitHub. Here is a link to GitHub and feel free to create a free account
as you will need it later in this course.
https://github.com/

1. Install Git on the Linux terminal (the black screen)
sudo yum update -y
sudo yum install git -y
2. Test that git is installed
git --version
Output: Yours will be similar to below
git version 2.47.1

Step 7: Clone the edukate website from Git Repository
Here’s a step-by-step guide to clone a repository from GitHub:

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 9

1. Clone the Repository
- Run the `git clone` command followed by the URL you copied:
git clone https://github.com/igbedo/edukate.git
2. Copy the repo files to the location where Apache webserver will server the files
sudo mv edukate/* /var/www/html/

That’s it! You’ve successfully cloned the edukate repository from GitHub.
8. Access the edukate website from the browser
- Refresh your browser with the IP address of your default Apache page to see
the updates. Or follow 1 and 2 in step 5 above.
- You will see the edukate website

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 10

Step 9: Create AMI (Amazon Machine Image)
Why Create an AMI?
At this point, we have the edukate website deployed. We want to save our work so
that we don't have to do all the above steps each time. The AMI is a way to save
our work in AWS.
Creating an AMI from an EC2 instance allows you to:
1. Backup: Preserve the state of your instance, including its configuration,
applications, and data.
2. Scaling: Quickly launch new instances with the same configuration. Wer will use
this later.

1. Log in to the AWS Management Console
- Go to the EC2 AWS Management Console.
https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/
- Log in with your credentials.
2. On the left navigation page:
- Go to Instances Section
- Click on instances
3. Select Your Instance:
- Find and select the instance you want to connect to. You will see the name as VM1.
Select the square button.

5. Create an AMI:
1. With the instance selected, click the Actions button.
2. Select image and template
3. Select create image
○ Image name: Enter edukate
○ Image description: my first AMI containing edukate website

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 11

4. Click Create image. AWS will start the process of creating the AMI.
5. It will take a few minutes for your image to be ready
5. See your new image
On the left navigation page:
1. - Go to Images Section
2. - Click on AMIs
3. You will see your image listed
4. Check that the status says Available before proceeding to the next section
6. Create another EC2 instance from Your AMI
Once your AMI is available:
● Check your image
● Click Launch Instance from AMI
● Here are the summary of the important steps. If you need more help, refer
to Step 2: Create an EC2 instance with Amazon Linux AMI
○ Name and tags (use edulate)
○ Key pair (login)- select your key
○ Firewall (security groups) - check http
● Click launch instance

7. Access the new edukate website from the browser
- Follow 1 and 2 in Step 5: Test that you can access the Apache default
website page

Step 10: Clean up: Delete your EC2 instance
It's good practice to always clean up after your lab exercises. If you don't clean up,
you could exceed your monthly quota and get charged. Be warned!
However, not every thing/service you create gets charged, so I will let you know
what to delete after every class.
For this part of the project, you need to delete EC2 instances.
To delete EC2, do the following:
1. Log in to the AWS Management Console
- Go to the EC2 AWS Management Console.
https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/

Cloud Technology Academy – Copyright Reserved-2024 12

- Log in with your credentials.
2. On the left navigation page:
- Go to Instances Section
- Click on instances
3. Select Your Instance:
- Find and select the instance you want to delete
4. Click Instance state at the top
5. Select Terminate(delete) instance
6. Click Terminate (delete) at the bottom of the screen
7. Your instance will be deleted. This will take a few minutes, and it will still appear in
your dashboard.
8. Ensure that the Instance state says ‘Terminated’

9. Delete any remaining instances by following the above steps.

Conclusion
Congratulations, you have completed part 1 of this project. You were able to do the
following:
1. Create a key pair
2. Create an EC2 instance with Amazon Linux AMI
3. Connect to the EC2 instance
4. Install Apache Webserver using Linux commands from the CLI (Command Line
Interface)
5. Test that you can access the website
6. Install git
7. Use git to clone the edukate website from the Git Repository
8. Move edukate to the right location for Apache to access it
9. Access your website from the web browser
10. Create AMI (Amazon Machine Image)
